feat(tree): Add the ability to associate metadata with Node Schema (#23219)
microsoft/FluidFramework: .changeset/grey-triangles-shout.md

---
"@fluidframework/tree": minor
---
---
section: tree
---

> Allow associating metadata with Node Schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metadata can now be associated with Node Schema
```

Users of TreeView can now specify metadata when creating Node Schema.

> This includes system-understood metadata, i.e., `description`.

Author: 🤦‍♂️

Example:

```typescript

class Point extends schemaFactory.object("Point", {
	x: schemaFactory.required(schemaFactory.number),
	y: schemaFactory.required(schemaFactory.number),
},
{
	metadata: { description: "A point in 2D space" }
}) {}

```

> Functionality like the experimental conversion of Tree Schema to [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) (`getJsonSchema`) leverages such system-understood metadata to generate useful information.

Reviewer: Are there some docs or release notes for this feature we could link to?

Author: We should introduce some generalized guidance around this.
 
There are a few things I could link to here:
1. The API docs on the website
  - Pros: Theoretically points to the most relevant information
  - Cons: Somewhat unstable (if the API is renamed, etc.)
2. The release notes containing the change that introduced the functionality
  - Pros: Stable
  - Cons: While the link is stable, the linked contents become less useful as updates to the APIs are made
3. The code file on GitHub
  - Pros: Honestly, I don't see any. Just included this as an option for completeness.
  - Cons: Unstable

Personally, I think option 1 is probably the most _useful_, but option 2 will be more stable. Option 3 is neither, IMO, just added for "completeness".

Author: ```suggestion
Functionality like the experimental conversion of Tree Schema to [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) ([getJsonSchema](https://github.com/microsoft/FluidFramework/releases/tag/client_v2.4.0#user-content-metadata-can-now-be-associated-with-field-schema-22564)) leverages such system-understood metadata to generate useful information.
```

> Functionality like the experimental conversion of Tree Schema to [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) (`getJsonSchema`) leverages such system-understood metadata to generate useful information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functionality like the experimental conversion of Tree Schema to [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) (`getJsonSchema`) uses such system-understood metadata to generate useful information.
```

Author: I guess I'm not sure why the latter is better here. Both are "correct", where my wording is technically a bit more specific. I don't really have a strong opinion either way, but I don't see the benefit in the change.

> In the case of the `description` property, this is mapped directly to the `description` property supported by JSON Schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of the `description` property, it is mapped directly to the `description` property supported by JSON Schema.
```

Custom, user-defined properties can also be specified.

> These properties will not be leveraged by the system by default, but can be used as a handy means of associating common application-specific properties with Field Schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These properties will not be used by the system by default, but can be used to associate common application-specific properties with Field Schema.
```

> Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example
```

---
"@fluidframework/tree": minor
---
---
section: tree
---

Metadata can be associated with Node Schema

Users of TreeView can now specify metadata when creating Node Schema via the experimental (alpha) `withMetadata` function.
This metadata may include system-understood properties like `description`.

Example:

```typescript

class Point extends withMetadata(
	schemaFactory.object("Point", {
		x: schemaFactory.required(schemaFactory.number),
		y: schemaFactory.required(schemaFactory.number),
	}),
	{
		description: "A point in 2D space",
	},
) {}

```

Functionality like the experimental conversion of Tree Schema to [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) (`getJsonSchema`) leverages such system-understood metadata to generate useful information.
In the case of the `description` property, it is mapped directly to the `description` property supported by JSON Schema.

Custom, user-defined properties can also be specified.

> These properties will not be used by the system by default, but can be used to associate common application-specific properties with Field Schema.

Reviewer 2: Right?
```suggestion
These properties will not be used by the system by default, but can be used to associate common application-specific properties with Node Schema.
```

#### Example

An application is implementing search functionality.
By default, the app author wishes for all app content to be potentially indexable by search, unless otherwise specified.
They can leverage schema metadata to decorate types of nodes that should be ignored by search, and leverage that information when walking the tree during a search.

```typescript

interface AppMetadata {
	/**

> 	 * Whether or not the field should be ignored by search.

Reviewer 2: ?
```suggestion
	 * Whether or not nodes of this type should be ignored by search.
```

	 * @defaultValue `false`
	 */
	searchIgnore?: boolean;
}

class Point extends withMetadata(
	schemaFactory.object("Point", {
		x: schemaFactory.required(schemaFactory.number),
		y: schemaFactory.required(schemaFactory.number),
	}),
	{
		description: "A point in 2D space",
		custom: {
			searchIgnore: true,
		},
	},
) {}

```

Search can then be implemented to look for the appropriate metadata, and leverage it to omit the unwanted position data from search.

> **Note:** these changes add the new property "metadata" to the base type from which all node schema derive.

Reviewer 2: The note feels a bit too "hidden" for its potential impact. Maybe a `#### Potential for breaking existing code` heading?
